a few years ago I always had this thing
happening to me especially at family
gatherings like T's with aunts and
uncles something like this when people
come up to you and they ask you so what
are you doing and I would have this
magical one-word to reply which would
make everybody happy
medicine I'm going to be a doctor very
easy that's it everybody is happy and
pleased and it could be so easy but this
effect really only lasts for 30 seconds
with me because that's then the time
when one of them would ask so in what
what area of medicine what specialty do
you want to go into and then I would
have to strip down and all honesty and
just say okay so I'm fascinated with the
colon it all started with the anus and
now it's basically the whole intestinal
tract and this would be the moment when
the enthusiasts and trickles and it
would maybe also get like awkwardly
silence in the room and I would think
this was terribly sad because I do
believe our BIOS are quite charming and
while we're in a time where many people
are thinking about what new superfood
smoothie to make or if gluttonous may be
bad for them actually hardly anyone
seems to care about the organ where this
happens the concrete anatomy and the
mechanisms behind it and sometimes it
seems to me like we're all trying to
figure out this magic trick but nobody's
checking out the magician just because
he is like an embarrassing hairstyle or
something and it actually they're
reasons
science does like the gutter for a long
time I have to say this so it's complex
there's a lot of surface area about 40
times the area of our skin then in such
a tight pipe there are so many immune
cells that are being trained there we
have 100 trillions of bacteria doing all
sorts of things producing little
molecules that
there's about 20 different hormones so
we are on a very different level than
our genitals for example and the nervous
system of our gut is so complex that
when we cut out a piece it's independent
enough that when we poke it it mumbles
back at us friendly but at least those
reasons are also the reasons why it's so
fascinating and important and it took me
three steps to love the gut so today I
invite you to follow me on those three
steps and the very first was just
looking at it and asking questions like
how does it work and why maybe does it
have to look so weird for that sometimes
and it actually wasn't me asking the
first kind of these questions but my
roommate so after one heavy night of
partying he came into our shared room
kitchen and he said Julia you study
medicine
how does pooping work and I did study
medicine but I had no idea so to go up
to my room and look it up in different
books and I found something interesting
I thought at that time so it turns out
we don't only have this outer sphincter
we also have an inner sphincter muscle
the outer sphincter we all know we can
control it we know what's going on there
the inner one we really don't so what
happens is when they are leftovers from
digestion they're being delivered to the
inner one first so this inner one will
open in a reflex and let through a
little bit for testing so there are
sensory cells that will analyze what has
been delivered
is it gaseous or is it solid and they
will then send this information up to
our brain and this is the moment when
our brain knows oh I have to go to the
toilet the brain will then do what it's
designed to do with it's amazing
consciousness it will mediate with our
surroundings and it will say something
like so I checked we are at this TEDx
conference
[Applause]
gaseous maybe if you're sitting on the
sides and you know you can pull it off
silently but solid maybe later so since
our outer sphincter and the brain is
connected with nervous themselves they
coordinate cooperate and they put it
back in a waiting line for other times
like for example when we're at home
sitting on the couch we have nothing
better to do we are free to go as humans
are actually one of the very few animals
that do this in such an advanced and
clean way and to be honest I had some
newfound respect for that nice inner
sphincter dude you know not connected to
nerves that care too much about the
outer world all the time just caring
about me for once I thought that was
nice and I used to not be a great fan of
public restrooms but now I can go
anywhere because I consider it more when
that inner muscle puts a suggestion on
my daily agenda and also I learned
something else which was looking closely
at something I might have shied away
from maybe the weirdest part of myself
left me feeling more fearless and also
appreciate myself more and I think this
happens a lot of times when you look at
the gut actually like this funny
rumbling noises that happens when you're
in a group of friends or at the office
conference table going like this is not
because we're hungry this is because our
small intestine is actually a huge neat
freak and it takes the time in between
digestion to clean everything up
residing in those eight meters of gut
really seven of them being very clean
and hardly smell like anything it will
chew a chiefess create a strong muscular
wave that moves everything forward and
that's been left over after digestion
this can sometimes create a sound but
doesn't necessarily have to always so
what we embarrassed
stuff is really a sign of something
keeping our insights fine and tidy or
this weird cricket shape of our stomach
a bit Quasimodo ish this actually makes
us be able to put pressure on our belly
without vomiting like when we're
laughing and when we're doing sports
because the pressure will go up and not
so much sideways this also creates this
air bubble that's usually always very
good visible in x-rays for example and
can sometimes with some people when it
gets too big create discomfort or even
some sensations of pain but for most of
the people it just results that it's far
easier to burp when you're laying on
your left side instead of your rep and
soon I moved a bit further and started
to look at the whole picture of our body
and health and this was actually after I
had heard someone I know a little bit
had killed himself and it happened that
I had been sitting next to that person
the day before and I had smelled that he
had had very bad breath and when I
learned of the suicide the next day I
thought could the gut have something to
do with it and I frantically started
searching if there were scientific
papers on the connection of gotten brain
and to my surprise I found many and it
turns out it's maybe not as simple as we
sometimes think we tend to think our
brain makes these commands and then
sends them down to the other organs and
then they all have to listen but really
it's more that's 10% of the nerves that
connect brain and gut deliver
information from the brain to the gut
and we know this for example in
stressful situations when there are
transmitters from the brain that are
being sensed by our gut so the gut will
try to like load lower other work and
like not be so working and taking away
blood and energy to save energy for
problem solving this can go as far as
nervous vomiting or nervous diarrhea to
get rid of food that it then doesn't
want to digest maybe more interestingly
90% of the nervous fibers that connect
gut and brain deliver information from
our GOC to our brain and when you think
about it a little bit it does make sense
because our brain is very isolated it's
in this bone
nice car surrounded by a thick skin and
it needs information to put together a
feeling of how am i as a whole body
doing and the gut actually it's possibly
the most important advisor for the brain
because it's our largest sensory organ
collecting information not only on the
quality of our nutrients but really also
how our so many of our immune cells
doing or things like the hormones in our
blood that it concerns and it can
package this information and send up to
the brain and it can there not reach
areas like visual cortex or word
formations otherwise when we digest we
would make we would see funny colours or
we would make funny noises no but it can
reach areas for things like morality
fear or emotional processing or areas
for self-awareness so it does make sense
that when our body and our brain is
putting together this feeling of how am
i as a whole body doing but the gut has
something to contribute to this process
and it also makes sense that people who
have conditions like irritable bowel
syndrome or inflammatory bowel disease
they have a higher risk of having
anxiety or depression I think this is a
good information to share because many
people were think after scud thing and
maybe also if this mental health thing
and maybe because science is not clear
on that right now it's really just that
their brain is feeling sympathy with
their gut this has yet to grow in
evidence until it can come into practice
but just knowing about this kinds of
research that are out there at the
moment helped me in my daily life and it
made me think different of my moods and
not externalize so much all the time I
feel oftentimes during the day we are a
brain and the screen and we will tend to
like look for answers right there and
maybe the work is stupid or our neighbor
but really moods can also come from
within and just knowing this helped me
for example when I sometimes wake up too
early and I start to worry and wander
around with my thoughts then I think
stop what did I eat yesterday that I
stress myself out too much did I eat too
late or something and then maybe get up
and make myself a tea something light
just and as simple as the sound I think
it's been surprisingly good for me
step 3 took me further away from our
body and really understanding bacteria
differently the research we have today
is creating a new definition of what
real cleanliness is and it's not you
know hygiene hypothesis I think many
maybe know this so it states that when
you have too little microbes in your
environment because you clean all the
time that's not really a good thing
because people get more allergies or
autoimmune disease then so I knew this
hypothesis and I thought I wouldn't
learn so much from looking at
cleanliness and a gut but I was wrong
so it turns out real cleanliness is not
about killing off bacteria right away
real cleanliness is a bit different when
we look at the facts 95% of all bacteria
on this planet don't harm us they can't
they don't have the genes to do so many
actually help us a lot and scientists at
the moment are looking into things like
do some bacteria help us clean the Dutch
do they help us digest do they make us
put on weight or have a lean figure
although were eating lots of us making
us feel more courageous or even more
resilient to stress so you see there are
more questions when it comes to
cleanliness and actually the thing is
it's about a healthy balance I think you
can't avoid the bed all the time this is
simply not possible
there's always something bad around so
what really the whole deal is when you
look at a clean gut it's about having
good bacteria enough of them and then
some bad my immune system meets the bed
too so it knows what it's looking out
for so I started having this different
perspective on cleanliness and a few
weeks later I held a talk at my
University and I made a mistake by a
thousand and I went home and I realized
it in that moment I was like I made a
mistake by a thousand oh god it's so
much and that's so embarrassing and I
started thinking about this as after a
while I thought okay
I'd made this one mistake but then I
also told so many like good and right
and helpful things I think it's it's ok
you know it's a clean thing and then I
was like oh wait maybe I took my
perspective on cleanliness further and
it's my theory at the moment maybe we
all do take it a bit further than just
cleaning our living room where we we
make it to sort of like a life hygiene
and knowing that this is about fostering
the good just as much as trying to
shelter yourself from the bed had a very
calming effect on me so in that sense I
hope today I told you mostly good and
helpful things and thank you for your
time for listening to me
[Applause]
[Music]
you